Mines are long-term investments, but relationships between mining companies and governments are often tense and impatient. Governments fear that they will be ripped-off by multinational companies, while the companies worry that governments will hold their assets hostage. Nervous companies seek contract terms that allow them to recover their costs as quickly as possible. However, this leads to taxes trickling in while exports are beginning to flood out. The risk is that governments see their fears confirmed and threaten to rip up the contracts. This risk just became reality for Acacia Mining plc in Tanzania. The FTSE 250 company is the largest gold producer in the country, and has long faced criticism for the amount of tax it pays there. Acacia’s “payments to government” report [pdf] released last week shows that the company, which operates three mines in Tanzania, exported $1bn (£770m) of gold, copper and silver last year, and only paid 8% of this in taxes and royalties to the government. What’s more, between 2010 and 2015, it paid out $444m in dividends to shareholders while not paying any corporate income tax in the country.  CEO Brad Gordon admits that the original mining agreement was not equitable. “The industry can be its own worst enemy,” he said in March. “When it sits down and agrees these terms it’s gonna come back and bite us.” In 2016 Acacia agreed [pdf] to bring forward corporate tax payments by three years. However, public and political outrage has only grown.  It is now painfully coming to a head, with the Tanzanian president John Magufuli accusing the company not only of striking an unbalanced deal but of massively under-reporting its gold exports to evade tax. Back in March the president decreed a ban on exports of unrefined metals, preventing Acacia from selling partially processed “concentrate” [pdf]. In April, as containers piled up at the Acacia gold mines and the port of Dar es Salaam, Magufuli appointed two committees of academics to investigate their contents. In May, the committees declared that the president’s suspicions were correct and the concentrate contained eight times more gold than the company had reported, as well as several other rare minerals such as iridium and ytterbium. Acacia maintains that these findings do not make sense, and argues that they have always declared all materials produced and paid all royalties and taxes that are due. They have also published statements from independent third parties that sample and test the concentrate. If the committees’ findings are accurate, the extent of the undervaluation is enormous, amounting to almost $4bn annually (one tenth of Tanzania’s GDP). Magufuli has responded forcefully, saying, “We should summon [Acacia] and demand that they pay us back our money. If they accept that they stole from us and seek forgiveness in front of God and the angels and all Tanzanians and enter into negotiations, we are ready to do business.” All of this has taken place against a backdrop of international reports which supports the belief that multinational corporations are engaged in widespread and systematic under-reporting of mineral exports from Africa.  A high-level panel report released in 2015 by the African Union (AU) and the UN Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) argued that $50bn of capital drains out of the continent each year through “illicit financial flows”. South Africa’s former president Thabo Mbeki, who chaired the panel, said “large commercial corporations are by far the biggest culprits”. However, the panel’s calculations were not based on actual cases but on interpreting mismatches in international trade data (which can arise from ordinary trading) as evidence of customs fraud.  Did the Tanzanian committee find evidence of the massive illicit financial flows that the high-level panel promised, or have impossible expectations inflamed the legitimate question of what would be a fair, equitable and stable mining agreement?  There are several reasons why the findings of President Magufuli’s committees are hard to believe. The scale of hidden metals production they suggest is huge. Acacia notes that the two mines involved are not large in global terms, but that the committees’ findings imply that overall the company produces more gold in Tanzania than AngloGold Ashanti produces from 19 mines and Goldcorp from 11 mines. They also argue that iridium and ytterbium are not found in large amounts in the type of gold deposits they are working at these sites, while the committees’ findings suggest they produce more than the world’s largest known suppliers.  For the committees’ analysis to be true implies an extraordinary conspiracy involving Acacia, its parent company Barrick Gold, the Tanzania Mineral Audit Agency, Acacia’s financial auditors, and independent companies involved in sampling and smelting the concentrate. It suggests that $4bn of additional annual sales have been hidden from shareholders. However, Acacia’s shareholders are not reacting like they have just found out that the company’s management have been defrauding them, nor that the company owns assets that are worth several times more than they thought. While the committees’ findings are implausible, this does not mean the government isn’t justified in its concern about Acacia’s tax payments. The main reason why Acacia did not pay corporate income tax for so long was the terms of the original mining agreement (as OpenOil explains [pdf]). It allowed for the company to recover all its costs, plus an additional 15%, before any tax on profits was due. On Monday, as the dispute escalated, Tanzania’s parliament rushed through two laws which allow the government to dissolve existing contracts if the terms are deemed “unconscionable”. The new laws ban companies from turning to foreign courts or tribunals to resolve disputes, and compel companies to process minerals within the country rather than exporting them as raw materials. Acacia is the most immediate target.  This is not a simple story. No one comes out of it looking good. Acacia may not have stolen billions of dollars worth of minerals – but it did make a deal that was hard to defend. Meanwhile, it is unclear whether President Magufuli’s tactics will benefit or harm the country in the long term. Barrick Gold and the Tanzanian government are now in talks in the hope of finding a solution. But reaching a balanced agreement will be difficult, with so many contested facts and so much bad blood, on all sides. And even if Magufuli “wins” in the high-pressure negotiation with Acacia, it could be at the cost of losing the confidence of investors in Tanzania. Maya Forstater (@mforstater) is a Visiting Fellow at the Center for Global Development.Alexandra Readhead (@ali_readhead) is an independent advisor on international tax and extractive industries.